In both “Good Country People” and “Cathedral, the protagonists are blind to the true realities of life, yet the removal of their comfort zones causes a huge awakening that changes their lives for the better.  Both protagonists have two extreme perceptions of life that make them ignorant to life’s facts.  The protagonists’ fanatical views of life blind them to the other view, which makes them dependent on only one view of life.  The protagonists have an epiphany making them realize that their extreme views are too fervent.  Undoubtedly, it is important for the protagonists to be thrown out of their comfort zones for them to realize that their ideas of the world are incorrect, and it must be balanced with the other extreme to lucidly understand life.

Because the narrator is exceedingly dependent on his five physical senses, his experience of life comes only from tangible and concrete objects.  From his observations, the narrator fabricates a mental representation of blind people living like drones and leading depressed lives.  The narrator’s examination of the blind comes from the movies in which “The blind moved slowly and never laughed…[and] were led by seeing-eye dogs” (Carver, 289).  His amateurish analysis of blind people limits his capacity to understand them.  Conjointly, the narrator’s ignorance to the blind is appended by nonfactual speculation.  The narrator reckons that he “remembered having read somewhere that the blind didn’t smoke because, as speculation had it, they couldn’t see the smoke they exhaled” (Carver, 293).  The narrator’s analysis of the world is incompetent because his knowledge is acquired from baseless facts and substandard observations.  Definitely, the narrator’s addiction to his senses creates an obscured comprehension of the world.

Analogously, Hulga’s reliance on her education permits her to discover life only from philosophical literature.  Hulga feels that she is enlightened because her perception of the world comes from books.  Hulga’s arrogant trust in her knowledge makes her think, “In my economy I’m saved and you are damned but I told you I didn’t believe in god” (O’Connor, 258).  Hulga believes that because she is a highly educated woman, her assessment of the world exceeds the human population, thus giving her the illusion that she recognizes the true meaning of life.  Likewise, her delusions make her conclude that life is meaningless.  Hulga explains to Pointer about life, “You poor baby…It’s just as well you don’t understand…We are all damned…But some of us have taken off our blindfolds and see that there’s nothing to see.  It’s a kind of salvation” (O’Connor, 259).  Again, Hulga thinks that she is one of the fortunate people who notice the insignificance of the world while everybody else remains blind to the facts.  Evidently, Hulga’s confidence in her literary knowledge prevents her from using her physical senses to generate a lucid observation and logical understanding of life.

Since the narrator’s trust in his senses restricts is ability to comprehend abstract concepts, it also limits his capability to value the objects he observes.  When the narrator watches television, he does not care to acknowledge the significance of the cathedral on television.  He admits to his indifference to life, “The truth is, cathedrals don’t mean anything special to me.  Nothing.  Cathedrals.  They’re something to look at on late-night T.V.  That’s all they are” (Carver, 298).  The cathedral does not fascinate the narrator because his choice to perceive the world tangibly makes him deem it worthless.  Furthermore, he assesses all objects he encounters at face value because they do not insinuate anything symbolic for him.  When the wife shows the narrator her poem, he neglects the poem as a piece of paper.  Again, he admits to not caring by saying, “I can remember I didn’t think much of the poem….I just don’t understand poetry” (Carver, 289).  The narrator is so dependent on comprehending the world with his senses that he does not take the time to understand the relevance of the words written on the poem.  Obviously, the narrator inhibits his own ability to interpret observable objects by depending heavily on the use of his five senses.
Similarly, Hulga’s faith in her learning confines her ability to appreciate physical objects.  When Hulga sees the countryside, she does not care to understand its implications.  Her life is spent sitting “All day on her neck in a deep chair reading.  Sometimes she went for walks but she didn’t like dogs or cats or birds or flowers or nature or nice young men.  She looked at nice young men as if she could smell their stupidity” (O’Connor, 256).  Hulga is not attracted to objects of the exterior world, because her preference to distinguish the world through books makes her consider the outside objects insubstantial.  Additionally, Hulga’s outlook of the world is so blurred that she does not even notice the alteration in her vision.  When she peers over the landscape “She didn’t realize he had taken her glasses but this landscape could not seem exceptional to her for she seldom paid any close attention to her surroundings” (O’Connor, 258).  Hulga’s attachment to knowledge prohibits her from enjoying the objects she encounters.  Clearly, Hulga limits her own ability to comprehend objects by relying heavily on the use of her education.

While the narrator’s comfort zone lies in the use of his senses, Robert removes the zone by falsifying the narrator’s observation.  When Robert exits the car, the narrator is immediately stunned by his visage.  The narrator exclaims, “The blind man, feature this, he was wearing a full beard!  A beard on a blind man!  Too much, I say” (Carver, 298).  The beard confounds the narrator because it contradicts his stereotyped view of the blind.  Robert’s other appearances hurl the narrator further out of his comfort zone.  The narrator describes Robert, “[H]e didn’t use a cane and he didn’t wear dark glasses.  I’d always thought dark glasses were a must for the blind” (Carver, 292).  Robert’s contradictions to the narrator’s observations starts making him realize that his stereotypes of the blind are incorrect.  Robert finally throws the narrator completely out of his comfort zone by forcing him to use his mind to draw a cathedral.  The narrator’s first time use of his mind, “was [an experience] like nothing else in [his] life up to now.  I was in my house.  I knew that.  But I didn’t feel like I was inside anything” (Carver, 299).  The narrator has an epiphany and acknowledges that the use of his five physical senses is making him ignorant to life.  He feels free and not bound by his senses to the physical world.  Unmistakably, the loss of his comfort zone frees him from the restraints of his five physical senses and allows him to understand and think abstractly about life.
Correspondingly, Pointer’s repeated courtly advances throw Hulga out of her comfort zone.  Pointer’s emotional kiss instantaneously amazes Hulga.  Being kissed passionately “was like surrendering to him completely.  It was like losing her own life and finding it again miraculously, in his” (O’Connor, 259).  The kiss astonishes her because her education never teaches her the feeling of a kiss, and now realizes that her conjectures of life are fallacious.  Hulga is thrown completely out of her comfort zone when Pointer tries to copulate with her.  Being thrown out of her comfort zone makes her feel “entirely dependent on him.  Her brained seemed to have stopped thinking altogether and to be about some other function that it was not very good at” (O’Connor, 260).  Hulga discovers that absolute reliance on education denies her mind the sensations one feels with objects, which purports her ignorance.  Certainly, the loss of her comfort zone frees her from the shackles of education and allows her to comprehend tangible objects.

The narrator and Hulga have two different extreme views of life that make them believe they understand the reality of life.  The narrator’s obsession with the physical senses and rejection of education makes him ignorant to life, while Hulga’s reliance on education and denunciation of the physical senses makes her uninformed to life.  However, they both think they know the connotations of life.  The narrator believes that if the world is perceived by the five senses, then that defines the nature of life.  He believes that physical blindness makes someone ignorant to life, thus believes Robert is oblivious to life.  If one of the senses is gone, then he does not have the ability to comprehend the world as well as someone who has all five of their senses.  On the contrary, Hulga believes that if the world is perceived through education, then that defines the meaning of life.  She reasons that educational blindness makes someone uneducated to life, thus believes Pointer is ignorant to the reality of life.  If education is lacking, then he does not have the ability to appreciate the world as well as someone who has a philosophical education.  In truth, both are more blind then the average human.  Their views of the world are so extreme that it blinds them from the other view.  When they are thrown out of their comfort zones, it forces them to expand their mind beyond their boundaries and experience the other side.  Experience of the opposite view lets them realize that their extreme views make them ignorant, and leading a balanced life containing both views will open their eyes.  If they were not thrown out of their zones, they would still be blinded by their perceptions, and they would never have obtained their enlightenment.  Ascertainably, by being thrown out of their comfort zones, the narrator and Hulga have an epiphany that demonstrates the reality of life and changes how they perceive the world.

####Works Cited####
Kennedy, XJ and Dana Gioia, eds.  Literature.  Third Compact Ed.  New York:  Longman, 2003.
Carver, Raymond.  “Cathedral.”  Kennedy and Gioia 289 – 299.
O’Connor, Flannery.  “Good Country People.”  Kennedy and Gioia 247 – 261.
